Feat: LIP-31 — Expanding stETH liquidity layer with over-collateralized minting (#81)
lidofinance/lido-improvement-proposals: LIPS/lip-31.md

---
lip: 31
title: Expanding stETH liquidity layer with over-collateralized minting
status: WIP

> author: Alexey Potapkin, Eugene Mamin, Eugene Pshenichnyi, Max Merkulov

Reviewer: Nitpick: Just noticed that we have different variations of names in LIPs:
- Alexey Potapkin, Alexei Potapkin
- Eugene Pshenichnyi, Eugene Pshenichnyy

4. **Platform evolution** – Moving from a single staking pool to a platform supporting multiple staking products aligns incentives among operators, builders, and stakers, fostering innovation while maintaining the battle-tested Core Pool for users seeking simple, traditional staking.

By hard-coding **over-collateralization at the protocol level** and measuring backing **per-vault**, the design contains tail risks while unlocking new ether supply lines. stETH remains a *single*, fungible liquidity layer; risk is isolated at the source, not socialized unless extreme conditions trigger failure modes.

## Specification

### Glossary

| Concept | Definition | 
|---------|------------|
| **Staking Vault** | Any contract or module that locks ETH and requests stETH mints through VaultHub. |
| **Total Value (TV)** | Sum of all ETH the staking vault controls on Execution + Consensus Layers simultaneously, incl. pending deposits. | 
| **Reserve Ratio (RR)** | Minimum share of TV that **should not** be represented by stETH. |
| **Force Rebalance Threshold (FRT)** | Minimum share of TV that incurs force rebalance if becomes represented by stETH, invariant: `FRT < RR` |

> | **Locked** | `locked = TV × (1 – RR)` (floored) |

Reviewer: I think this formula outlines the maximum locked value. One can mint less than the TV allows and get less locked than `TV × (1 – RR)`

| **Liability** | stETH shares minted against the staking vault position (value rebases with stETH) |
| **Global backing invariant** | `stETH.totalSupply() ≤ Core Pool total supply + Σ Staking Vault locked` |

> | **Reserve Breach** | If `TV – stETH.getPooledEthBySharesRoundUp(liability) < RR × TV`, staking vault enters *unhealthy* state. The round-up ensures conservative liability measurement. |

Reviewer: Not sure about Reserve Breach term, but unhealthy state of Vault are determined via FRT, not RR

> | **Bad debt** | If `stETH.getPooledEthBySharesRoundUp(liability) > TV`, staking vault enters *bad debt* state. Using round-up prevents hiding insolvency through rounding errors. |

Reviewer: Could you clarify which part of the code this refers to? I found the closest one,  `_badDebtShares`, and there the comparison is in shares, not ether.

```math
\text{shareRate} = \frac{\text{internalEther}}{\text{internalShares}}
```

This ensures that external vault performance doesn't affect the core stETH share rate under normal operation. The external ether is then calculated as:

```math
\text{externalEther} = \text{externalShares} \times \text{shareRate} = \frac{\text{externalShares} \times \text{internalEther}}{\text{internalShares}}
```

After applying the oracle report with fees:

```math
\text{totalPooledEther}_{\text{post}} = \text{internalEther}_{\text{post}} + \text{externalShares}_{\text{post}} \times \frac{\text{internalEther}_{\text{post}}}{\text{internalShares}_{\text{post}}}
```

> NB: Any changes in `shareRate` affect `externalEther` as a part of the regular stETH token rebase induced by `AccountingOracle`.
Therefore, the staking vault must maintain the reserve sufficient to update the total collateralized ether amount as a part of the token rebase.

#### Mint external shares

The amount of external stETH shares minted MUST be fully backed via a staking vault (including `RR`).

> NB: The mint operation MUST NOT incur the stETH token rebase.

> > **Important**: When checking vault capacity for minting, the protocol uses `getPooledEthBySharesRoundUp()` to calculate the ETH value of shares. This ensures that vaults cannot mint more shares than their collateral supports, even by 1 wei.

Reviewer: Hmm, the code compares shares, not ether. All fees are subtracted from TV in `_maxLockableValue`, then this value is converted to shares in `_totalMintingCapacityShares`.

**Rebalance invariants:**
1. Total shares remain constant: `totalShares_old = totalShares_new`
2. Total pooled ether remains constant: `totalPooledEther_old = totalPooledEther_new`
3. Share rate remains unchanged (no rebase triggered)

**Process for rebalancing** $\Delta S_{\text{ext}}$ external shares:

The vault must transfer ether equal to: $\Delta ETH = \text{getPooledEthBySharesRoundUp}(\Delta S_{\text{ext}})$

This round-up calculation is important: the protocol verifies that `msg.value` exactly equals `getPooledEthBySharesRoundUp(_amountOfShares)` to prevent any rounding discrepancies that could lead to unbacked shares.

After rebalance:
```math
externalShares_{new} = externalShares_{old} - \Delta S_{\text{ext}}
```
```math
internalShares_{new} = internalShares_{old} + \Delta S_{\text{ext}}
```
```math
internalEther_{new} = internalEther_{old} + \Delta ETH
```
```math
bufferedEther_{new} = bufferedEther_{old} + \Delta ETH
```

Rebalance is used to:
- Restore vault health when reserves fall below thresholds
- Handle forced rebalancing when FRT is breached
- Manage collateral during slashing events

#### Oracle reports

> Accounting oracle reports happen in the same cadence as before, but now include handling of vault-related bad debt (in cases when bad debt is assigned to be socialized by the protocol, happens only explicitly and MUST be assigned to the Lido DAO Agent).

Reviewer: Consider using the term _internalize_, similar to how it is used in the code, and reserve the term _socialize_ for bad debt transfer operations to another vault.

```suggestion
Accounting oracle reports happen in the same cadence as before, but now include handling of vault-related bad debt (in cases when bad debt is assigned to be internalized to the protocol, happens only explicitly and MUST be assigned to the Lido DAO Agent).
```

Token rebase is implemented such that `externalEther` gets updated according to the newly delivered Lido Core pool changes after rewards and fees are distributed.

##### Rewards, penalties, and fees

Rewards and penalties accrued by the Lido Core pool validator set define the stETH token rebase. The key change is that share rate calculations now use internal ether and shares:

Transient balance as observed during the report gathering:
```math
transientCLBalance_{report} = 32ETH \times (CLValidators_{report} - CLValidators_{pre})

> ```

Reviewer: Consider avoiding "Transient balance" term, since we already use the term "Transient ether" to refer to deposits that are still in flight (depositedValidators - clValidators) * 32.

Would suggest `appearedValidators` for `CLValidators_report - CLValidators_pre` and
`appearedValidatorsBalance` for `32 eth * (CLValidators_report - CLValidators_pre)` since we already have a term `appearedValidators` in the Oracle Report Sanity Checker

Principal CL balance as observed during the report: 
```math
principalCLbalance_{report} = CLbalance_{pre} + transientCLBalance_{report}
```
Rewards accrued as observed during the report:
```math
CLrewards_{report} = [CLbalance_{report} + withdrawalVault.balance_{report}] - principalCLbalance_{report}
```

> Internal ether before fees:

Reviewer: Consider using "Internal ether" without "before fees", since it does not change, and such clarification hints to the reader that there will be a change

```math
internalEther_{\text{beforeFees}} = 
    internalEther_{pre} + CLrewards_{report} + elRewardsVault.balance_{report} - wqWithdrawals_{report}
```
Internal shares before fees:
```math
internalShares_{\text{beforeFees}} = 
    internalShares_{pre} - sharesToBurn_{report}
```

Protocol fees are now calculated based on internal values:
```math
sharesToMintAsFees = \frac{feeEther \times internalShares_{\text{beforeFees}}}{internalEther_{\text{beforeFees}} - feeEther}

> ```

Reviewer: nitpick: `feeEther` is not explained where it came from. It's not very important for this paragraph, but as a reader, I tripped over this point.

After fees and bad debt internalization:
```math
internalShares_{\text{post}} = internalShares_{\text{beforeFees}} + sharesToMintAsFees + badDebtToInternalize
```
```math
externalShares_{\text{post}} = externalShares_{pre} - badDebtToInternalize
```

Lido Core continues to be the sole source of *token* rebases; however, the
oracle now carries the extra field `vaultsRoot`, containing the Merkle root of each vault's `TV`, `fees`, `liability`, `slashing reserve`.

> The on‑chain `AccountingOracle` stores the last accepted root. `VaultHub.processVaultReport(proof, values)` can be called permissionlessly

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The on‑chain `AccountingOracle` stores the last accepted root. `LazyOracle.updateVaultData(values, proof)` can be called permissionlessly
```

Author: not really

#### Why rounding up matters

When converting shares to ETH value for liability calculations, rounding up ensures:

1. **Conservative bad debt detection** – A vault's liability is always measured at its maximum possible value, preventing edge cases where rounding down could hide insolvency.

2. **Strict collateralization enforcement** – When checking if a vault has sufficient collateral, the liability is calculated as the worst-case (highest) value, ensuring true over-collateralization.

3. **Protection against rounding attacks** – Malicious actors cannot exploit rounding errors to mint unbacked stETH or hide bad debt by manipulating share amounts.

#### Example: Bad debt detection

Consider a vault with:
- Total Value (TV): 1000.4 ETH
- Liability: 1000 shares
- Share rate: 1.0005 ETH/share

Using regular division (rounds down):
- Liability value = 1000 × 1.0005 = 1000.5 ETH (rounds down to 1000 ETH)
- Bad debt check: 1000 ETH ≤ 1000.4 ETH ✓ (incorrectly shows healthy)

Using `getPooledEthBySharesRoundUp`:
- Liability value = ceiling(1000 × 1.0005) = 1001 ETH

> - Bad debt check: 1001 ETH > 1000.4 ETH ✗ (correctly detects bad debt)

Reviewer: Consider switching eth -> eth wei to avoid any misinterpretations

This 1 wei difference in calculation can be the difference between detecting insolvency and allowing unbacked minting.

#### Implementation consistency

The protocol enforces this rounding consistently:
- **Bad debt detection**: `stETH.getTotalPooledEtherBySharesRoundUp(liability) > TV`
- **Reserve breach**: `TV – stETH.getTotalPooledEtherBySharesRoundUp(liability) < RR × TV`
- **Rebalancing**: `msg.value` must equal `getPooledEthBySharesRoundUp(_amountOfShares)`

> - **Withdrawable calculations**: Obligations are valued using round-up to prevent over-withdrawal

Reviewer: - As mentioned above, part of this is clearly converted to shares before comparison
- RR -> FRT (if Reserve breach is defined as Unhealthy state)

## Specification (minimal)

> #### Function: `Lido.totalPooledEther() → uint256`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Function: `Lido.getTotalPooledEther() → uint256`
```

### Why track external shares instead of external ether directly

stETH is defined by its share mechanics, and all protocol logic revolves around shares and their rate. By expressing external contributions and redemptions in terms of stETH shares, the protocol remains consistent. Ether is only an input or output measure, while shares define the in-protocol liquidity and distribution rules.

### Why token rebase only through Lido Core

Lido Core acts as a validation performance benchmark oracle in a sense that stETH reward rate isn't changing by allowing external ether to be used for minting, meaning that the Core pool represents the opinionated validator set voted in by the Lido DAO striving for balance between decentralization, efficiency, and resilience.

## Security considerations

### No unbacked mint

Invariant is enforced upon every new stETH mint.

For the already minted, external shares should stay reasonably overcollaterized to accommodate locked increase due to the historically-positive stETH token rebase.

> Overcollaterization is controlled with the appropriately chosen `RR` and `FRT` values to allow fine-grainted control:

Reviewer: nitpick
```suggestion
For the already minted, external shares should stay reasonably over-collaterized to accommodate locked increase due to the historically-positive stETH token rebase.
Over-collaterization is controlled with the appropriately chosen `RR` and `FRT` values to allow fine-grainted control:
```

### Implementation risk

A faulty implementation could allow malicious actors to mint or burn stETH at will, breaking the token’s economic model.

Rigid code reviews, external audits, well-defined access controls, emergency mechanisms, and thorough sophisticated test coverage is essential.

### Staking limits and pause

External shares has a global-to-TVL limit enforcing now new mints can exceed it.

External shares minting consumes staking rate limit and respects minting pauses.
External shares burning returns back staking rate limit (still clamped to its max value).

Pauses are implemented on multiple layers of the system:
- Individual or multiple vaults can be non-eligible for minting using granular limits
- VaultHub has a pause mechanism disabling minting and withdrawing operations for vaults
- Rate limit mechanism can prevent stETH total supply increase by minting
- Overall minting can be paused
- All stETH token transfers can be paused

### One new minter/burner for stETH

This LIP introduces a new source of minting and burning, increasing the importance of access control, deployment configuration, and monitoring.

> To limit the control surface, all minting and burning of external shares is authorized only via the single `VaultHub` contract. There is a global minting limit preventing external shares to exceed the sane limits upon initial proposal adoption (as said above).

Reviewer: nitpick: for _external_ shares minting/burning

Losses can be covered by:
- replenishing the staking vaults accrued bad debt with additional funds;
- socializing the bad debt among vaults containing slashed validors of the same node operator;
- executing a self-coverage application (see [LIP-18](./lip-18.md));
- internalizing the losses to protocol, decreasing stETH token rebase (as it would have been with the Lido Core pool staking penalties) within the next oracle report (see bad debt internalization mechanism described above)

### Emergency pause

The collateral registry contract (`VaultHub`) and auxiliary parts implement an emergency pause mechanism, allowing to minimize the potential impact of the discovered vulnerability or unspecified critical protocol state, which is suggested to be used with a GateSeal instance.

Paused state prevents:
- a new staking vault from being registered in the collateral registry;
- already registered vaults can't be disconnected;
- stETH can't be minted or burned against staking vaults;
- ether can't be funded or withdrawn from the registered vaults;
- rebalance operations are paused;
- staking vaults can't receive oracle reports;

> - ether can't be deposited to beacon chain from staking vaults

Reviewer: I couldn't find anything that would force a pause on PDG when pausing on VaulHub. As far as I can see, they have separate pauses. If you mean that the pause should be triggered simultaneously on VaultHub and PDG, then it is worth clarifying this explicitly

Author: goood catch!

- **Buffer management**: The buffered ether mechanics, withdrawal request handling, and deposit allocation algorithms function as they do today.
- **Validator lifecycle**: The process of spinning up validators, managing exits, and handling rewards through the existing Node Operator Registry remains unchanged for Lido Core.

### wstETH wrapper compatibility

The wrapped stETH (wstETH) contract and its deployments across L1 and L2s maintain full compatibility:

- **Unchanged interface**: The wstETH wrapping/unwrapping mechanics remain identical, as they depend only on stETH's share-based accounting, which is preserved.
- **Cross-chain bridges**: Existing bridge implementations for wstETH on Arbitrum, Base, Optimism, Polygon, and other L2s continue functioning without modification.
- **Share rate consistency**: The fundamental share rate calculation preserves the wstETH:stETH exchange rate continuity, ensuring no disruption to existing positions.
- **Integration stability**: DeFi protocols using wstETH as collateral or for liquidity provision experience no changes in behavior or required integration updates.

> ### Withdrawal system compatibility

Reviewer: The actors between whom the discount assigned to finalized applications in WQ is socialized are changing. Now, minted fees to operators and treasury are excluded from those who receive these surpluses.

Author: gud

1. **Expanding addressable market** – Many stakers desire specific operator choice, DVT configurations, or compliance constraints that a single pooled model cannot accommodate. Vaults enable these use cases while preserving stETH liquidity.

2. **Enhanced validator set diversity** – By supporting diverse staking strategies (operator-led liquid staking, DVT clusters, DeFi loops, institutional vaults), the protocol promotes a more resilient and decentralized validator ecosystem.

3. **Risk isolation without liquidity fragmentation** – The Lido V2 model implicitly assumes every ETH deposit carries equal risk, socialized across all holders. As external ether sources join the ecosystem, this assumption becomes untenable. Without safeguards, a single high-risk vault could slash enough stake to force a global negative rebase or mint stETH minutes before an exit, externalizing risk.

4. **Platform evolution** – Moving from a single staking pool to a platform supporting multiple staking products aligns incentives among operators, builders, and stakers, fostering innovation while maintaining the battle-tested Core Pool for users seeking simple, traditional staking.

> 5. **Economic alignment** – External vault operators pay ongoing fees for accessing infrastucture and stETH liquidity, ensuring that incentives between Lido Core and external vaults are aligned appropriately.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
5. **Economic alignment** – External vault operators pay ongoing fees for accessing infrastructure and stETH liquidity, ensuring that incentives between Lido Core and external vaults are aligned appropriately.
```

By hard-coding **over-collateralization at the protocol level** and measuring backing **per-vault**, the design contains tail risks while unlocking new ether supply lines. stETH remains a *single*, fungible liquidity layer; risk is isolated at the source, not internalized to the protocol unless extreme conditions trigger failure modes.

## Specification

### Glossary

| Concept | Definition | 
|---------|------------|
| **Staking Vault** | Any contract or module that locks ETH and requests stETH mints through VaultHub. |
| **Total Value (TV)** | Sum of all ETH the staking vault controls on Execution + Consensus Layers simultaneously, incl. pending deposits. | 
| **Reserve Ratio (RR)** | Minimum share of TV that **should not** be represented by stETH. |
| **Force Rebalance Threshold (FRT)** | Minimum share of TV that incurs force rebalance if becomes represented by stETH, invariant: `FRT < RR` |
| **Liability** | stETH shares minted against the staking vault position (value rebases with stETH) |
| **Reserve** | `reserve = ceilDiv(liability * RR, 1 - RR)`, additional reserve for liability to be locked |

> | **Minimal reserve** | `minimalReserve`, minimal amount of additional reserve to be locked |

Reviewer 2: Need to mention slashing reserve here? Otherwise, it is unclear why we need minimal

- $\Delta S_{\text{ext}}$ as the number of external shares to be minted
- $\text{shareRate} = \frac{\text{internalEther}}{\text{internalShares}}$ as the current internal share rate

The relationship between incremental external shares and the ether they represent:

```math
\Delta ETH_{\text{ext}} = \Delta S_{\text{ext}} \times \text{shareRate} = \Delta S_{\text{ext}} \times \frac{\text{internalEther}}{\text{internalShares}}
```

After minting:
- External shares increase: `externalShares_new = externalShares_old + ΔS_ext`
- Total shares increase: `totalShares_new = totalShares_old + ΔS_ext`
- External ether implicitly increases by: `ΔS_ext × shareRate`
- The global backing invariant must still hold: `totalSupply ≤ internalEther + Σ Staking Vault locked`

#### Burn external shares

A staking vault can burn stETH shares from its balance to unlock the corresponding external ether collateral. This decreases the stored `externalShares`:

- $\Delta S_{\text{ext, burn}}$ as the number of external shares to burn
- The ether value represented by these shares: $\Delta ETH_{\text{ext, burn}} = \Delta S_{\text{ext, burn}} \times \frac{\text{internalEther}}{\text{internalShares}}$

> After burning:

Reviewer 2: Reduces redemption obligations in case of any

#### Rebalance

Rebalance allows converting external shares to internal by transferring ether from vaults to the Lido Core pool. This operation maintains key invariants while adjusting the internal/external balance:

**Rebalance invariants:**
1. Total shares remain constant: `totalShares_old = totalShares_new`
2. Total pooled ether remains constant: `totalPooledEther_old = totalPooledEther_new`
3. Share rate remains unchanged (no rebase triggered)

**Process for rebalancing** $\Delta S_{\text{ext}}$ external shares:

The vault must transfer ether equal to: $\Delta ETH = \text{getPooledEthBySharesRoundUp}(\Delta S_{\text{ext}})$

This round-up calculation is important: the protocol verifies that `msg.value` exactly equals `getPooledEthBySharesRoundUp(_amountOfShares)` to prevent any rounding discrepancies that could lead to unbacked shares.

After rebalance:
```math
externalShares_{new} = externalShares_{old} - \Delta S_{\text{ext}}
```
```math
internalShares_{new} = internalShares_{old} + \Delta S_{\text{ext}}
```
```math
internalEther_{new} = internalEther_{old} + \Delta ETH
```
```math
bufferedEther_{new} = bufferedEther_{old} + \Delta ETH
```

> Rebalance is used to:

Reviewer 2: Reduce redemption obligations

```math
principalCLbalance_{report} = CLbalance_{pre} + transientEther_{report}
```
Rewards accrued as observed during the report:
```math
CLrewards_{report} = [CLbalance_{report} + withdrawalVault.balance_{report}] - principalCLbalance_{report}
```
Internal ether (mind fees don't affect it):
```math
internalEther_{\text{beforeFees}} = 
    internalEther_{pre} + CLrewards_{report} + elRewardsVault.balance_{report} - wqWithdrawals_{report}
```
Internal shares before fees:
```math
internalShares_{\text{beforeFees}} = 
    internalShares_{pre} - sharesToBurn_{report}
```

Protocol fees are now calculated based on internal values:

```math
feeEther = totalRewards * protocolFeeRate
```
```math
sharesToMintAsFees = \frac{feeEther \times internalShares_{\text{beforeFees}}}{internalEther_{\text{beforeFees}} - feeEther}
```

After fees and bad debt internalization:
```math
internalShares_{\text{post}} = internalShares_{\text{beforeFees}} + sharesToMintAsFees + badDebtToInternalize
```
```math
externalShares_{\text{post}} = externalShares_{pre} - badDebtToInternalize
```

Lido Core continues to be the sole source of *token* rebases; however, the

> oracle now carries the extra field `vaultsDataTreeRoot`, containing the Merkle root of each vault's totalValue, cumulativeLidoFees, liabilityShares, maxLiabilityShares, and slashingReserve (which contributes to the vault's minimal reserve calculation), more details about "lazy oracle" system in [LIP-32](./lip-32.md).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
oracle now carries the extra field `vaultsDataTreeRoot`, containing the Merkle root of each vault's `totalValue`, `cumulativeLidoFees`, `liabilityShares`, `maxLiabilityShares`, and `slashingReserve` (which contributes to the vault's minimal reserve calculation), more details about "lazy oracle" system in [LIP-32](./lip-32.md).
```

The **cumulativeLidoFees** field tracks the total fees owed by each vault to Lido DAO. These fees accumulate continuously and are settled to the Lido treasury.

> The on‑chain `AccountingOracle` stores the last accepted root. `LazyOracle.updateVaultData(...)` can be called permissionlessly throughout the oracle period to update individual vaults lazily.

Reviewer 2: lazily = asynchronously to the main report phase?
